Add the Swan Lake Alpha5 Release Note (#2113)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-alpha5/RELEASE_NOTE.md

If `scores` is an int array, then,

```bash
bal run file.bal -- --scores=10 --scores=20 --scores=30
```

This produces the following int array.

```bash
[10, 20, 30]
```

**Option Boolean Parameters**

When there’s an option of `boolean`, `boolean[]`, or `boolean?` type, it does not take an `option` argument. The presence of the option is considered to be `true` and the absence of it is considered to be false. 
In the following example, suppose `results` is a boolean array.

```bash
bal run file.bal -- --results --results --results
```

This produces the following boolean array.

```bash
[true, true, true]
```

#### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Alpha5](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Alpha5%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina).

### Standard Library Updates

#### New Features

> Added compiler plugin validation for services in the following packages: `http`, `grpc`, `websocket`, `websub`, `websubhub`, `graphql`, `kafka`, `rabbitmq`, `nats`, `stan`, `email`, `tcp`, `udp` and `file`

Reviewer: Order the package names alphabetically.

```suggestion
Added compiler plugin validation for services in the following packages: `email`, `file`, `graphql`, `grpc`, `http`, `kafka`, `nats`, `rabbitmq`, `stan`, `tcp`, `udp`, `websocket, `websub`, and `websubhub`.
```

If `scores` is an int array, then,

```bash
bal run file.bal -- --scores=10 --scores=20 --scores=30
```

This produces the following int array.

```bash
[10, 20, 30]
```

**Option Boolean Parameters**

When there’s an option of `boolean`, `boolean[]`, or `boolean?` type, it does not take an `option` argument. The presence of the option is considered to be `true` and the absence of it is considered to be false. 
In the following example, suppose `results` is a boolean array.

```bash
bal run file.bal -- --results --results --results
```

This produces the following boolean array.

```bash
[true, true, true]
```

#### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Alpha5](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Alpha5%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina).

### Standard Library Updates

#### New Features

> ##### `graphql`` Package

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### `graphql` Package
```

> - Added named fragment support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added named fragment support in GraphQL queries.
```

> - Added enum support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added enum support for GraphQL services.
```

> - Added map support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added map support for GraphQL fields.
```

- Added compiler plugin validation for GraphQL services

> ##### `email` Package

Reviewer 2: Can't we add a single line for this? e.g.

Added compiler plugin validation for services in the following packages: `udp`, `http`, `websocket`, ... and `tcp`.

Author: @ldclakmal

Reviewer 3: Yeah, having a single line would be better.

Reviewer 4: Fixed with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/2113/commits/99d6ed39eb0c61c5fbe48c180fb843857a5bf056

> ##### `graphql` Package
> 
> - Added named fragment support
> - Added enum support
> - Added map support
> - Added compiler plugin validation for GraphQL services
> 
> ##### `email` Package
> Added compiler plugin validation for Email listener services.
> 
> ##### `udp` Package
> Added compiler plugin validation for UDP services.
> 
> ##### `http` Package
> Added compiler plugin validations for HTTP services.
> 
> ##### `websocket` Package
> Added compiler plugin validation for WebSocket services.
> 
> ##### `websub` Package
> Added compiler plugin validation for WebSub subscriber services.
> 
> ##### `websubhub` Package
> Added compiler plugin validation for WebSubHub services.
> 
> ##### `kafka` Package
> Added compiler plugin validations for Kafka services.
> 
> ##### `rabbitmq` Package
> Added compiler plugin validations for RabbitMQ services.
> 
> ##### `nats` Package
> Added compiler plugin validations for NATS services.
> 
> ##### `stan` Package
> Added compiler plugin validations for STAN services.
> 
> ##### `tcp` Package
> Added compiler plugin validation for TCP services.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Added compiler plugin validation for services in the following packages: `http`, `grpc`, `websocket`, `websub`, `websubhub`, `graphql`, `kafka`, `rabbitmq`, `nats`, `stan`, `email`, `tcp`, `udp` and `file`

##### `graphql` Package

- Added named fragment support
- Added enum support
- Added map support
```

Reviewer: Shall we order these alphabetically?
Added compiler plugin validation for services in the following packages: `email`, `file`, `graphql`, `grpc`,  `http`, `kafka`, `nats`, `rabbitmq`, `stan`, `tcp`, `udp`, `websocket`, `websub`, and `websubhub`.

- An issue causing the complement of numeric literals to return incorrect values has been fixed.
- Negation has been disallowed with numeric literals.
- Subtyping rules have been fixed to consider the `never` type, which denotes an empty set of values as a subtype of any type `T`.
- Relational expressions with lists have been fixed to consider the relative order of lists with different sizes.
- Any non-error value will match the wildcard match pattern at runtime even when the matched expression's static type includes a subtype of `error`.
- An invalid attempt to transfer out a value via a return statement that uses `self` in an isolated object method results in a compilation error.
- In a `readonly` and `class` intersection, the method qualifiers are now preserved from the class.

#### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Alpha5](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Alpha5%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFE).

### Runtime Updates

#### New Features

> ###### Support for Configurable Variables with Records Having Fields of Record Types

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't this be a level 5 heading?

Author: Fixed.

```ballerina
public type Person readonly & record {
     string name;
     int id;
     Address address;
};

public type Address  record {
    string city;
    County country;
};

public type County  record {
    string name;
};

configurable Person person = ?;

```

The  `Config.toml` would be as follows.

```toml
[person]
name = "waruna"
id = 10
address.city="Colombo"
address.country.name="Sri Lanka"

```

> ###### Support for Configurable Variables with Arrays Having Fields of Record Types

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't this be a level 5 heading?

Author: Fixed.

```ballerina
configurable Person[] & readonly personArray = ?;
```

The  `Config.toml` would be as follows.

```toml
[[personArray]]
name = "manu"
id = 11
address.city="New York"
address.country.name="USA"

[[personArray]]
name = "hinduja"
id = 12
address.city="London"
address.country.name="UK"
```

> ###### Support for Configurable Variables with Multidimentional Arrays

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
###### Support for Configurable Variables with Multidimensional Arrays
```

```ballerina
configurable int[][] & readonly int2DArr = ?;
```

The  `Config.toml` would be as follows.

```toml
int2DArr = [[1,2],[3,4]]
```

> ###### Support for Optional Module Name in TOML Syntax of Configurable Variables

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't this be a level 5 heading? Check all.

Author: Fixed.

When providing values for configurable variables, the module information should be provided in the `Config.toml` file according to the following specifications.

* The org-name and module-name are optional for configurable variables defined in the root module of the program.
* The org-name is optional only for configurable variables defined in the root package of the program.

For example, consider a package with the organization name as `myOrg` and root module name as `main`. 

The  `main.bal` would be as follows.

```ballerina
import main.foo;
import importedOrg/mod;
configurable string mainVar = ?;
public function main() {
// use imported modules
}
```

> The`foo.bal` file of the `main.foo` module will be as follows.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The `foo.bal` file of the `main.foo` module will be as follows.
```

```ballerina
configurable string fooVar = ?;
```

In the `mod.bal`, which is from another package with the organization name `importedOrg` and module name `mod`, 

```ballerina
configurable string modVar = ?;
```

the values can be provided in `Config.toml` as follows.

```toml
mainVar = "variable from root module"
[main.foo]
fooVar = "variable from non-root module of the root package"
[importedOrg.mod]
modVar = "variable from non-root package"
```

#### Improvements

> ###### Improved Command-Line Argument Parsing

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't this be a level 5 heading?

The command-line arguments are now parsed into:
- options
- option arguments
- operands

**Options**

Included record parameter as the last of the parameter specify options.

```ballerina
public type Person record {
	string name;
	float? score = 0;
};

public function main(*Person person) {
	// Process data here
}
```

```bash
bal run file.bal -- --name riyafa --score=99.9
```

In the above example, `name` and `score` are options. `riyafa` and `99.9` are arguments of the option.

**Operands**

Other parameters that are not included records specify operands; for these parameters, the position is significant and the name is not.

```ballerina
public type Person record {
	string name;
	float? score = 0;
};
public function main(int efficiency, string character, *Person person) {
	// Process data here
}
```

```bash
bal run file.bal -- --name riyafa  100 --score=99.9 Good
```

This example, which is the same as above includes `100`, which gets mapped to `efficiency`, and `Good`, which gets mapped to `character` as operands. 

> Both operand and option parameters can be of types int, float, decimal, string, array of any of these types, and union of any of these types with nil. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Both operand and option parameters can be of types `int`, `float`, `decimal`, `string`, array of any of these types, and union of any of these types with `nil`. 
```

If `scores` is an int array, then,

```bash
bal run file.bal -- --scores=10 --scores=20 --scores=30
```

This produces the following int array.

```bash
[10, 20, 30]
```

**Option Boolean Parameters**

When there’s an option of `boolean`, `boolean[]`, or `boolean?` type, it does not take an `option` argument. The presence of the option is considered to be `true` and the absence of it is considered to be false. 
In the following example, suppose `results` is a boolean array.

```bash
bal run file.bal -- --results --results --results
```

This produces the following boolean array.

```bash
[true, true, true]
```

#### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Alpha5](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Alpha5%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina).

### Standard Library Updates

#### New Features

> ##### GraphQL Package

Reviewer 2: Shall we stick to the same styling format that we used for package names in the Alpha4 release note?

Author: Fixed.

- Added named fragment support
- Added enum support
- Added map support
- Added compiler plugin validation for GraphQL services

##### Email Package
Added compiler plugin validation for Email listener services.

##### UDP Package
Added compiler plugin validation for UDP services.

##### HTTP Package
Added compiler plugin validations for HTTP services.

##### WebSocket Package
Added compiler plugin validation for WebSocket services.

> ##### Websub Package

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
##### WebSub Package
```

Author: Changed to "`websub` Package" as per https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/2113#discussion_r618606537

Added compiler plugin validation for WebSub subscriber services.

> ##### WebsubHub Package

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
##### WebSubHub Package
```

Author: Changed to "`websubhub` package" as per https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/2113#discussion_r618606537.

- DATE -> `time:Date`
- TIME -> `time:TimeOfDay`
- TIME WITH TIME ZONE -> `time:TimeOfDay`
- TIMESTAMP -> `time:Civil`
- TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE -> `time:Civil`

##### WebsubHub Package

Added the `websubhub:ServiceConfig` annotation.

#### Bug Fixes

##### Log Package 

Invalid characters are now [escaped properly in log messages](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues/1192).

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Alpha5](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%22Swan+Lake+Alpha5%22+label%3AType%2FBug).

### Developer Tools Updates

#### Bug Fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for Swan Lake Alpha5 of the repositories below.

- [Dev Tools](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Alpha5%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FDevTools)
- [Language Server](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+Swan+Lake+-+Alpha5%22+label%3AType%2FBug+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer)

> 

Reviewer 5: Extran new lines

Author: Fixed.

---
layout: ballerina-blank-page
title: Release Note
---
### Overview of Ballerina Swan Lake Alpha5

> <em>This is the <fifth> Alpha release in a series of planned Alpha and Beta releases leading up to the Ballerina Swan Lake GA release.</em> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<em>This is the fifth Alpha release in a series of planned Alpha and Beta releases leading up to the Ballerina Swan Lake GA release.</em> 
```

Author: Fixed.
